Metal is having a moment.
Not this kind though, sadly. Gold hits
another record.
>> Spot gold prices have climbed above
$4,000 an ounce for the first time.
>> I'm extremely The key word is scare.
>> During times of economic and political
and financial turbulence, you buy the
dollar, you buy US treasuries, you seek
safety.
>> Not so much now. Now you buy gold. What
we're seeing at the moment is not like
anything really that we've seen over the
last couple of decades. In October, gold
extended its already furious run from
last year and showed few signs of
abating.
>> This gold rally really looks unstoppable
at this time.
>> Excitement is evident online on shopping
streets and in capital markets.
>> Just gold, gold, gold the whole time.
>> Chinese mining company Zing Gold
recently raised $3.2 billion in one of
the year's biggest IPOs. But it's not
just a gold rally. Look at silver. In
October, it reached its highest price
per ounce in more than four decades.
>> I think it is a warning sign that people
are very anxious.
>> Gold is the ultimate safe haven asset, a
heart rate monitor, if you will, to the
health of the global financial system.
And because of that, when you see a
spike in the gold price, your first
question should really be, what's gone
wrong?
Gold is the ultimate precious metal.
It's been around since uh the beginning
of time. Gold has seen it all and
survived through it all, and it probably
will continue to do so
>> because it's reliable, easy to trade,
and high value despite lacking the
intrinsic utility of a semiconductor or
shipping container full of these things.
>> Gold has outperformed equities. It's
outperformed almost every other asset
class. If you take your starting point
at 2,000,
>> it is the one asset that does very well
when the typical parts of your portfolio
go down.
>> It breached $1,000 during the global
financial crisis, 2,000 during COVID,
and 3,000 after the Trump
administration's tariff announcements,
which perhaps was a wake-up call.
The dollar for many many years has been
seen as the haven of the market because
uh people trust uh the US government and
uh they trust dollar assets.
>> Welcome to 2025.
>> The dollar it's the single biggest
decline in 6 months in 50 years. Gold is
is at record highs.
>> And here's what that looks like. This
gold line, because why would it be any
other color, shows how much the metal
has increased in value since January.
The green line shows the dollar's
depreciation over the same period. That
discrepancy reflects what's called the
debasement trade.
>> It is the idea that faith and trust in
the dollar is no longer what it once
was. So you have investors looking at
other assets. People do that trade when
they are losing their confidence in
traditional government bonds and fiat
currencies.
>> And in that situation,
gold becomes quite appealing because
there is no counterparty. It's just you
and your gold.
>> It's independent from the government's
influence as well,
>> which is no longer something investors
automatically say about the dollar or
the US central bank.
So the Federal Reserve has long been
seen as kind of a bull work of global
financial stability. It has cherished
independence from the political system
in the US. Now the pressure on the Fed
from the White House and President Trump
has thrown that whole dynamic into
question.
>> Am I allowed to appoint myself at the
Fed? I do a much better job than these
people.
>> How sustainable is the Fed's position
given the position that President Trump
has taken and given the pressure he's
putting on the Fed to lower interest
rates? If the Fed is slashing interest
rates all the time,
>> that makes gold more appealing because
unlike cash, it doesn't actually
obviously yield interest. And so when
interest rates are lower, gold becomes
relatively more appealing. But on the
other hand, you have inflation that
makes gold appealing as a hedge.
>> And inflation's back on investors minds
as Trump's tariffs risk driving prices
higher around the world.
>> So that's kind of a heads I win, tails,
you lose scenario for gold. Over the
summer, the dollar fell to its weakest
level in more than three years.
>> While there are different views on
what's behind that weakness, the
takeaway is that the US isn't seen as
the uh trusted ally it once was.
>> But to find the source of gold's rally,
we need to look back further than
Trump's second term. A pivotal moment
for the metal was in 2022 after Russia's
full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
G7 countries froze the assets of the
Russian central bank that were held in
Europe.
>> That caused many countries around the
world to think we need to diversify away
from the dollar in order to uh shield
ourselves against potential or future uh
US sanctions or at least getting caught
up in the drag net of those.
>> And by countries, we're talking central
banks which have been steadily adding to
their gold reserves. In the early 2000s,
they were selling a few hundred tons
into the markets every year. They've
flipped that now. They're buying about
1,000 tons a year.
>> And for the third year in a row in 2024,
according to the World Gold Council,
China, India, Poland, and the Czech
Republic have been among the biggest
buyers.
>> China in particular has been probably
the most important central bank buying
gold over the last couple of years. It's
the biggest consumer of gold in the
world. It's the biggest producer of gold
in the world. Really, gold is a China
story. People's Bank of China is trying
to create or at least um help to
facilitate a world that's less dependent
on the dollar. And one way of doing that
for the PBOC is to reduce um its
holdings of the dollar such as the US
treasuries and buy gold instead.
>> About halfway through the 20th century,
the dollar became the world's reserve
currency. If you want oil, you use
dollars. If you want gold, you use
dollars. If you want to exchange
currencies, often the dollar sits in the
middle of that transaction.
>> Even most of China's exports um are
settled in the dollar rather than the
UN.
>> The dollar made up nearly 3/4 of the
world's foreign exchange reserves in
2000, but its share has been slipping
since then. Pressure on the Fed with
tariffs, inflation, and sanctions in
mind. It's prompted trading partners to
look at the US and its currency in a
different light. People are concerned
with geopolitical tensions with uh trade
conflicts and Trump's chaotic uh tariff
policies
>> and again feeds the idea that why is the
world settling trade in dollars? What
alternatives do we have?
>> Demand for gold's also been boosted by
goldbacked exchange traded funds or ETFs
which let investors bet on the metal's
price without ever holding any. Maybe
they don't have access to buy gold bars
or to buy physical gold, but they have
this access to ETFs.
>> September was uh the biggest month of
inflows that we've seen in more than 3
years.
>> We saw that ETF inflows were six times
larger than what a rates based model
predicts.
>> And remember, this trend doesn't just
concern the precious metal King Midas
once mistakenly transformed a daughter
into. Although, we shouldn't be that
upset. She'd be worth a fortune right
now.
Platinum and silver this year have
rallied a lot more than gold.
>> Now, there's a nuance that can get lost
in the discussion about precious metals
other than gold.
>> They're also useful. They're used in
industry. They have real sources of
demand. So, those markets function a
little bit differently than gold, but
they tend to do really well when gold
does well. It's partly about this
debasement theme where people are
worried about the ability of many
developed economies to pay back their
sovereign debts. And because of that,
they're looking to other precious metals
like platinum, like silver, and they're
looking to cryptocurrencies.
>> Gold and to some degree Bitcoin, they
are ways to express an opinion that the
system itself is going to have some
problems.
>> When it comes to haven assets, the gold
standard remains well, you know,
>> this gold rally speaks to the times we
are living in.
>> Not everyone's convinced currencies and
bonds are so easily replaceable. A major
deescalation of Trump's tariffs or a
peace deal between Russia and Ukraine
could also spur a price decline.
Volatility is very much still in gold's
fine print. Still, Goldman Sachs and
Deutsche Bank both say they expect gains
to continue for now. With any rally, it
naturally makes people worried. Is this
a bubble? Is this going to pop soon? One
thing it does have going for it is that
the secular trends that have been
supporting it over the last few years
are still very much there. It's clearly
a very fragile geopolitical moment. Old
alliances are being tested, new
alliances are being formed. And I think
as long as these really steep tensions
do persist, then that clamor for safe
haven assets such as gold is going to
continue.
[Music]